If God comes to you and wants to love you to the infinite degree, He has to seek your praise.
Because your delight in Him as your treasure comes to consummation in expressions of praise to Him.
And therefore He's the one being in the universe for whom self-aggrandizement is the highest virtue, is the most loving thing to do.
I think most of us instinctively recoil at the idea that someone would be all about their own praise.
But John Piper shows us here why, with God, it's actually the most loving thing possible.
I'm Dan Kruver.
In this episode of Light and Truth, John Piper helps us see why God's glory and our joy actually belong together.
The seminar was originally delivered at Bethlehem Baptist Church on Wednesday evening, November 13, 1991.
Let me pose a question.
Like me, you would be troubled by this question now.
Namely, if you say God is a show-off or if you say He loves His reputation or if you say He has a passionate zeal to become famous
There's something inside us that says, yeah, but we're not supposed to do that.
So how come God's supposed to do that?
I don't like it.
There's a gut reaction until you've got all the pieces in place that make you say, that doesn't sound like the kind of John 3 16 God I learned about in Sunday school.
Or to sum it up, it doesn't sound like
God is loving.
He's so wrapped up in self.
Now, let me try to answer that in a nutshell here before moving on.
And those of you who've read Desiring God, I hope would be able to reproduce this argument, but it's really crucial.
God is unique in the universe.
Nobody is like God.
He is totally self-sufficient and needs
Nobody.
We are not like that.
We are needy.
We are deficient.
We are sinners.
We are finite.
We are weak.
We are utterly unlike God in that regard.
And therefore it may be that right for God to do some things is not right for us to do.
And love on God's part might look like something that love on our part doesn't look like.
If I
were to go about the world saying, my goal is to become famous, my goal is to attract attention to myself, my goal is to magnify my glory.
I think you would be absolutely right in saying that man is a megalomaniac, he's conceited, he's egocentric, he's not loving, because all he is cares about himself.
He doesn't really care about us, because attracting us to him, what's that?
Now, if you go up to God,
and picture God doing that, can you account for why that would be loving?
For God to go around the world saying, I want your praise, I want your glory, I want your honor, I want to be famous among you, I want to have a good reputation, I want to be known by you, I want everybody's praise and glory for myself.
Why would that be loving?
And here's the reason.
When you love somebody, what you give to them is what's best.
And the best thing God can give is God.
If he were to give us the world and not himself, he would not be loving.
So God is loving in giving me himself as a treasure that I find buried in a field.
And in my joy, I go and sell everything I have to buy that field because he is my treasure.
And so he gives himself to me.
Then C.S.
Lewis taught me, what do you do when you receive something that is of paramount importance and excellence in the world?
Answer, you praise it, you talk about it, you exalt it.
And what Lewis taught me, and this is so liberating, is that the joy that you have in your treasure is consummated by the release of
of words and expressions of appreciation and value that's on it.
You all had experiences like that.
The most recent one would be at the dome.
That's the biggest one would be at the dome.
Seventh game, suppose that you're allowed to go in there, and as you go in to the seventh game of the World Series, they're handing out these little cards.
And on the card is written, Dear Ladies and Gentlemen.
Tonight,
We would like you to have maximum joy in the twins, our treasured ball team.
And you may experience pleasure to the maximum of your potential of joy tonight.
There is just one qualification.
No sound may come out of your mouth.
Now, I don't think it's true that you would say, well, no problem.
we could all experience maximum joy, we just wouldn't be able to express it.
That's not true, because the expression of those crazy fans is the consummation of a joy.
If you hold their hands down, if you hold their shoulders down, your mouth, you are cutting joy off at a certain level and not letting it come to completion.
Now, if that's true and Lewis
documents it from all kinds of things quite forget baseball and talk about whatever you love if if you love something really are emotionally engaged with it and you are forbidden from any kind of demonstration or expression of that value then your joy does not come to consummation in that thing if that's true then God is seeking the consummation of your joy in seeking
your praise.
He's the only being in the universe that can do that without being unloving.
If I were to seek your praise for me and not for God, I would be seeking your loss.
I wouldn't be seeking your ultimate joy.
But if I'm God, let's just say if God comes to you and wants to love you to the infinite degree
He has to seek your praise because your delight in him as your treasure comes to consummation in expressions of praise to him.
And therefore, he's the one being in the universe for whom self-aggrandizement is the highest virtue, is the most loving thing to do.
Let me say that again.
He's the one being in the universe for whom self-exaltation
is the most loving thing he can do.
You can't copy him in that.
To copy him in that is to say that the most loving thing you can do is to live for God's exaltation.
Not your own.
Then you really copy him.
He lives for God exaltation.
We ought to live for God's exaltation.
And since exalting God brings our joy to consummation,
Therefore, it is a loving thing for God to be self-centered.
Or God is most glorified in you when you are most satisfied in Him.
We just unpacking Christian hedonism here.
I want you to be able to handle that because I know that when I say these kinds of things and we just have a whole slew of texts more to look at, unless you can process
how this is loving, it just won't sound right.
The fear that I have is that we have construed the love of God in a very man-centered way.
And what I've just presented to you is a safeguard.
It's a theological, biblical safeguard against interpreting the love of God for you in a you-centered way.
God loves me for his glory.
Remember what it says in Romans 15, seven, and eight, I think it says, Christ became a servant to the circumcision to show the truthfulness of God in order that he might confirm the promises to the patriarchs and in order that the Gentiles and Minneapolis might
glorify Him for His mercy.
Christ became a servant, that is He became incarnate, and lived, and suffered, and died in a Jewish context in order that Minneapolis Gentiles might glorify Him for mercy.
He loved us for the glory of His mercy.
And unless you
Unless you compute the love of God that way, you will put yourself at the center of God's universe.
That's what a lot of people do with John 3 16.
And God belongs at the center of his universe, and I'm real happy to drink at the edges of that fountain forever.
Now, where are we?
Let's keep going with question number
Well, just a couple more texts to answer question number six about the name of God and the reputation of God.
Isaiah 43, 20, God calls the people of Israel, those whom I formed for myself that they might declare my praise.
So he chose Israel that they might declare his praise.
That's why Israel existed.
Now, here we are in the New Testament, 1 Peter 2, 9.
Same thing.
You, speaking to the church, are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, God's own people.
Why?
Why did he choose Bethlehem?
All those in Bethlehem who are his.
That you may declare the wonderful deeds of him who called you out of darkness into his marvelous light.
We exist
to make a name for God.
I was just writing a letter this afternoon to one of our staff, and it's his birthday tomorrow.
It's Tom.
And as I was writing, Tom and I have been working together now for 11 years.
tremendously precious partner in the ministry.
And I got carried away about my own sense of call.
And I said, Tom, it's becoming simpler and clearer in these days that I just feel like my life is to be spent upholding the godness of God.
just putting God on the agenda of people's lives, reasserting God's place in the areas of life, declaring that God is the centerpiece, that God is the center of his own affections.
Just God, God, God, America, God, Bethlehem, God, evangelicalism, not man, not techniques, not management, not programs, not causes,
But God, God, God.
This is sort of a simple way of defining my path of significance.
And there it is.
It'll be different.
The path will be different for each of us.
But all of us really ought to say that the essence of my life is to image forth God for people.
Declare the wonderful deeds of him who called you out of darkness into his marvelous light Question number seven According to 2 Samuel 7 23 What is the unique thing about Israel?
By implication, what's the unique thing today?
about being God's people.
2 Samuel 7, 23 says, What other nation on earth is like your people Israel whom God went to redeem to be his people making a name for himself and doing for them great and terrible things by driving out before his people a nation
And it's God's.
My question was, what's the unique thing about Israel?
And the answer is, the unique thing about us or Israel is not us.
The unique thing about Israel is not Israel.
It's God's making himself a name by what he does with us.
The unique thing about God's people is that they are the
freely unconditionally chosen showcase for his making a name for himself in a whole bunch of ways and that's what unique about us.
God chose to make a name for himself on this person or on this church or on this people.
It's a very humbling effect if you understand it at its root.
You know, I feel like I should insert this here just by way of caution.
with regard to the issue of pride and boasting theologically.
I would like it to be true that there were a theology that is so humbling you can't boast in it.
That's not true.
There is no such theology.
There is a humbling theology, it's called biblical theology, that if you properly respond to it and understand it humbles you.
But you know what taught me that there is no theology that you can't brag about and use as a ground for boasting?
It's by just looking at the sorts of things people do boast about in society.
For example, people actually boast about being white.
Now tell me, what did any white person do to get white?
Zero, absolutely zero.
Nothing, I mean nothing, less than nothing.
How can you possibly boast in something for which you did less than nothing to become?
But we can, we can, we do it.
Or American, or a piper, or Jones or Smith, or, I mean, there's a whole array
of characteristics which you have, which you have absolutely nothing to do with, which you are tempted to brag about and feel superior about.
And you have nothing to do with it.
Sheer, I mean, I've often said the most clear demonstration of unconditional grace in my life is that I was born in the family of Bill and Ruth Piper.
Absolutely nothing to do with it.
I could have been born into a Muslim family.
Now, I just say that to say, I'm right now saying this is a humbling theology I'm giving you, but I'm not naive.
I know that you could walk out of here and go down the street and brag that tonight you learned how to be humble.
You could do that.
It is a humbling thing, however.
It's a humbling thing to be told that the unique thing about you is that God freely chose you to make a showcase for his power, his glory, his excellence, his virtue, and you just happened to be
the clay on which he is demonstrating his remarkable skill.
We've already looked at question number eight about the work of God at the Red Sea, the ultimate aim of God in the Exodus, and how was the missionary effectiveness of this aim illustrated in the following history.
He divided the sea to demonstrate his glory and Rahab.
Heard about it.
She was
converted, it says in Hebrews 11 that she was the woman of faith and therefore his interest in his name also became a means of salvation.
Number nine, using Psalm 106 verses 7 and 8, explain what I mean by gospel logic.
How does this passage show that
God's God's centeredness is the ground of the gospel.
Psalm 106, seven through eight.
Our fathers, when they were in Egypt, did not consider thy wonderful works.
They did not remember the abundance of thy steadfast love, but rebelled against the most high at the Red Sea.
So God is not rescuing a very cooperative people here.
He's not their virtue that's eliciting his mercy and power.
Yet, this is the gospel yet now, yet he saved them for his namesake that he might make known his mighty power.
Now here's what I mean by gospel logic.
Salvation
is grounded not in my virtue.
It's not grounded in my accomplishments.
It's grounded ultimately in God's zeal to uphold his name and demonstrate his mighty power in my life.
so that we pray things like, for thy namesake, O Lord, pardon my guilt, for it is great.
One of my goals is that you would understand that prayer and pray it from now on.
That when you bow to pray, you would pray, my guilt is great,
Please forgive it.
Why?
For your name is at stake in my forgiveness.
Now we've got lots more to say about that because we must get the New Testament here and the cross and how the blood of Jesus is in fact a demonstration of the worth of the name of God.
When you pray, hallowed be thy name.
Close your prayers.
I'm troubled when people don't close their prayers in Jesus' name.
I hesitate to say anything the first or second or third or fourth or fifth time because I don't want to be picky about what you have to say out loud and what you have to think in your head.
But after a pattern develops and people don't pray in Jesus' name, get real concerned.
that maybe they really don't understand what's going on here.
Because what's going on in putting hallowed be thy name at the beginning and in Jesus name, amen at the end is a statement that the goal of my prayer in my life and the universe is the hallowing, the magnifying, the cherishing, the praising of God's glorious name.
And the ground of all my hope
that anything I've prayed now would be answered to that end is God's love for the name of His Son, which was vindicated and demonstrated in the cross.
For me to say in Jesus' name, amen, at the end of a prayer is no throwaway phrase.
It's a statement of absolute reliance upon what Jesus did on the cross.
I have no claim to get any prayer answered at all as a sinner.
Zero, I have no access whatsoever into the throne room.
I am dirty and defiled and outside, and God in His freedom said His favor upon me, and for Jesus' sake cleansed me, and what I mean by for Jesus' sake is that in Jesus the name of God was vindicated in saving those who trust in Him.
So when I say in Jesus' name, I mean, He did it all.
Everything is based on Jesus.
Every little echo of my desire for hope and for help and for my children and my marriage and my church, it's all on Jesus.
Thank you for listening to this episode of Light and Truth, where we are committed to providing God-centered preaching to help you see Christ clearly,
and treasure him truly.
I'm your host, Dan Kruver.
On our next episode, John Piper begins an eight-part series titled, Living and Dying for the Glory of Christ.
I hope you'll join us.
For more resources, visit desiringgod.org.